**Abstract R4Epis -- the process**

**Title**

Advancing data analytics for field epidemiologists using R: the R4epis
innovation project

**Authors (in alphabetical order)**

*R4Epis project group:*

Amrish Baidjoe (1,2), Elburg van Boetzelaar (3), Raphael Brechard (4),
Antonio Isidro Carrión Martín (4), Kate Doyle (5), Christopher Ian
Jarvis (1, 6), Thibaut Jombart (1,6), Zhian Kamvar (1,6), Patrick
Keating (1,5), Anna Kuhne (4), Annick Lenglet (7), Pete Masters (4),
Dirk Schumacher (1), Rosamund Southgate (4), Carolyn Tauro (4), Alex
Spina (1,8), Maria Verdecchia (4), Larissa Vernier (7)

**Affiliations**

1)  R Epidemics Consortium

2)  Imperial College London, United Kingdom

3)  Médecins Sans Frontières, Cox' Bazaar, Bangladesh

4)  Médecins Sans Frontières, London, United Kingdom

5)  Médecins Sans Frontières, Addis Abeba, Ethiopia

6)  London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, United Kingdom

7)  Médecins Sans Frontières, Amsterdam, The Netherlands

8)  University of Exeter, United Kingdom


Data analysis is integral to informing operational elements of
humanitarian medical responses. Field epidemiologists play a central
role in informing such responses as they aim to rapidly collect, analyse
and disseminate results to support Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF) and
partners with timely and targeted intervention strategies. However, a
lack of standardised analytical methods within MSF challenges this
process. 
The R4epis project group consists of 18 professionals with expertise in:
R programming, field epidemiology, data science, health information
systems, geographic information systems, and public health.
Between October 2018 and April 2019, R scripts were developed to address
all aspects of data cleaning, data analysis, and automatic reporting for
outbreaks (measles, meningitis, cholera and acute jaundice) and surveys
(retrospective mortality, malnutrition and vaccination coverage).
Analyses and outputs were piloted and validated by epidemiologists using
historical data. The resulting templates were made available to field
epidemiologists for field testing, which was conducted between February
and April 2019.  
R4epis will contribute to the improvement of the quality, timeliness,
consistency of data analyses and standardisation of outputs from field
epidemiologists during emergency response. 
